docu/memory-graph-spec.md, before:

# Memory Graph & Versioning Spec

> Draft — last updated {{DATE}}

## Purpose
Provide an append-only, provenance-rich data model so the TimeBack agent can recall every fact/event/version without "starting over."  This spec extends `analytics-spec.md`.

## Core Principles
1. **Append-only** – no hard deletes; every change is a new version row.
2. **Provenance first** – every version stores `source_id`, `checksum`, `uploaded_by`, `uploaded_at`.
3. **Latest-view simplicity** – materialized views expose “current state” so front-end / agent queries stay simple.

---

## Tables

### 1. `entity_version`
Tracks every atomic payload (student, assessment, program, etc.).

| Column | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| `entity_version_id` | bigint pk | Surrogate key |
| `entity_type` | text | e.g. `student`, `assessment`, `program_assignment` |
| `entity_pk` | text | Business key (e.g. `student_id` or `student_id|subject|term`) |
| `json_payload` | jsonb | Full row snapshot as ingested |
| `checksum` | text | SHA-256 of raw file record |
| `source_file` | text | Original filename |
| `uploaded_by` | text | User / system token |
| `uploaded_at` | timestamptz | Upload time |
| `effective_at` | date | Date the record is valid (e.g. test_date) |
| `superseded` | bool default false | Flag set when a newer version supersedes this one |

#### Indexes
* `(entity_type, entity_pk, effective_at DESC)` – fast latest lookup.
* GIN on `json_payload` – ad-hoc JSON queries.

### 2. `file_ingest_log`
| Column | Type | Notes |
| `file_id` pk | uuid |
| `filename` | text |
| `checksum` | text |
| `row_count` | int |
| `ingest_started_at` | timestamptz |
| `ingest_completed_at` | timestamptz |
| `status` | enum (`pending`,`success`,`error`) |
| `error_message` | text |

---

## Merge Logic
1. Loader computes row checksum.
2. If `(entity_type, entity_pk, checksum)` already exists → **skip** (idempotent).
3. Otherwise insert new version row, mark previous latest row (`superseded=true`).
4. A nightly job materializes `*_current_v` views.

Pseudo-SQL:
```sql
-- inside loader tx
INSERT INTO entity_version (...)
ON CONFLICT (entity_type, entity_pk, checksum) DO NOTHING;

-- supersede previous
UPDATE entity_version
SET superseded = true
WHERE entity_type = :type
  AND entity_pk   = :pk
  AND entity_version_id <> currval('entity_version_entity_version_id_seq')
  AND superseded = false;
```

---

## Materialized Views
### `student_current_v`
```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW student_current_v AS
SELECT (json_payload->>'student_id')::text  AS student_id,
       json_payload->>'first_name'          AS first_name,
       json_payload->>'last_name'           AS last_name,
       (json_payload->>'grade')::int        AS grade,
       uploaded_at
FROM   entity_version ev
WHERE  entity_type = 'student'
  AND  superseded = false;
```
Refresh nightly or after bulk ingest.

### `assessment_current_v`
Similar pattern keyed by `student_id|subject|term`.

---

## API Impact
* `/api/parser/parse` remains unchanged; loader writes to `entity_version` instead of flat table.
* New endpoint `/memory/timeline/:entity_type/:entity_pk` returns full version history (paginated).

---

## Open Questions
1. Do we need per-field diff storage to save space?
2. When volume grows, move cold versions to object storage + parquet/iceberg?

---

_This spec supersedes any previous versioning notes in `analytics-spec.md`.  Implementation tickets are tracked under P0 in `ax-priority-plan.md`._

Commit message:

adition of raw data, new documetation , change log, new context reports, new summary md files

docu/memory-graph-spec.md, after:

# Memory Graph & Versioning Spec

> Draft — last updated {{DATE}}

## Purpose
Provide an append-only, provenance-rich data model so the TimeBack agent can recall every fact/event/version without "starting over."  This spec extends `analytics-spec.md`.

## Core Principles
1. **Append-only** – no hard deletes; every change is a new version row.
2. **Provenance first** – every version stores `source_id`, `checksum`, `uploaded_by`, `uploaded_at`.
3. **Latest-view simplicity** – materialized views expose “current state” so front-end / agent queries stay simple.

---

## Tables

### 1. `entity_version`
Tracks every atomic payload (student, assessment, program, etc.).

| Column | Type | Description |
|--------|------|-------------|
| `entity_version_id` | bigint pk | Surrogate key |
| `entity_type` | text | e.g. `student`, `assessment`, `program_assignment` |
| `entity_pk` | text | Business key (e.g. `student_id` or `student_id|subject|term`) |
| `json_payload` | jsonb | Full row snapshot as ingested |
| `checksum` | text | SHA-256 of raw file record |
| `source_file` | text | Original filename |
| `uploaded_by` | text | User / system token |
| `uploaded_at` | timestamptz | Upload time |
| `effective_at` | date | Date the record is valid (e.g. test_date) |
| `superseded` | bool default false | Flag set when a newer version supersedes this one |

#### Indexes
* `(entity_type, entity_pk, effective_at DESC)` – fast latest lookup.
* GIN on `json_payload` – ad-hoc JSON queries.

### 2. `file_ingest_log`
| Column | Type | Notes |
| `file_id` pk | uuid |
| `filename` | text |
| `checksum` | text |
| `row_count` | int |
| `ingest_started_at` | timestamptz |
| `ingest_completed_at` | timestamptz |
| `status` | enum (`pending`,`success`,`error`) |
| `error_message` | text |

---

## Merge Logic
1. Loader computes row checksum.
2. If `(entity_type, entity_pk, checksum)` already exists → **skip** (idempotent).
3. Otherwise insert new version row, mark previous latest row (`superseded=true`).
4. A nightly job materializes `*_current_v` views.

Pseudo-SQL:
```sql
-- inside loader tx
INSERT INTO entity_version (...)
ON CONFLICT (entity_type, entity_pk, checksum) DO NOTHING;

-- supersede previous
UPDATE entity_version
SET superseded = true
WHERE entity_type = :type
  AND entity_pk   = :pk
  AND entity_version_id <> currval('entity_version_entity_version_id_seq')
  AND superseded = false;
```

---

## Materialized Views
### `student_current_v`
```sql
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW student_current_v AS
SELECT (json_payload->>'student_id')::text  AS student_id,
       json_payload->>'first_name'          AS first_name,
       json_payload->>'last_name'           AS last_name,
       (json_payload->>'grade')::int        AS grade,
       uploaded_at
FROM   entity_version ev
WHERE  entity_type = 'student'
  AND  superseded = false;
```
Refresh nightly or after bulk ingest.

### `assessment_current_v`
Similar pattern keyed by `student_id|subject|term`.

---

## API Impact
* `/api/parser/parse` remains unchanged; loader writes to `entity_version` instead of flat table.
* New endpoint `/memory/timeline/:entity_type/:entity_pk` returns full version history (paginated).

---

## Open Questions
1. Do we need per-field diff storage to save space?
2. When volume grows, move cold versions to object storage + parquet/iceberg?

---

## Storing External & Competitive Data

**Important Architectural Note:** The `entity_version` model described in this specification is designed exclusively for storing **internal, student-level source data**.

External or competitive data (e.g., NWEA national norms, state-level proficiency averages) must **not** be stored in the `entity_version` table. This data is typically aggregated and has a different structure.

To ensure data integrity and simplify analysis, competitive data should be stored in a separate, dedicated table. A recommended schema for this is:

```sql
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS external_benchmarks (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    source VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL, -- e.g., 'NWEA National Norms', 'California DOE'
    year INT NOT NULL, -- The academic year of the data
    geography_level VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL, -- e.g., 'National', 'State', 'District'
    geography_name VARCHAR(255), -- e.g., 'California', 'Springfield School District'
    grade VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
    subject VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL,
    metric_name VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL, -- e.g., 'MAP Growth Mean RIT Score', 'Proficiency Rate'
    metric_value FLOAT NOT NULL,
    imported_at TIMESTAMPTZ DEFAULT NOW()
);
```

This approach keeps our internal "ground truth" cleanly separated from external benchmarks, which is critical for producing clear and trustworthy comparative insights.

---

_This spec supersedes any previous versioning notes in `analytics-spec.md`.  Implementation tickets are tracked under P0 in `ax-priority-plan.md`._
